Now,
I think this machine is for work. Well, after you
left this ranch, did you come here immediately?
No, my husband was working here with the
Hawaiinan. What is it called now? The Hawaiinan?
The Hawaiinan, yes. Well, he had a ranch with the
lady. with Maria McEmbra, a teacher. Yes. That's
what she worked with. She worked with my father.
She also sowed. Yes. Because she wanted them to
work on the land they had. It wasn't much, but they
worked on it. Yes. My father worked on it and sowed
it. He sowed corn, beans, whatever he sowed, he
gave it to him. Yes. That's why I told him, I said, I
don't want half of it, Juan, I don't want it. All I
want is for you to work for my land, because I want my
land to be worked for, so that they don't take it
away from us, sell it to us. And they said, well,
when you do what you do, come. And I said, yes. They
came and brought pumpkins, eggplants, candy,
everything my father planted, they came and
brought it. My father went and said, there's this
and that, because they're going to bring it. I used
to take care of a kid who had to go to school. And
there was a lot of corn. When we came from Kelaren,
we packed up and went to Rancho Uribe. And that's
where we went to work. To unload, to chop, to wet the
land.
Before
you came here to Mexico during the war, can you tell
us something about the war? Why is there a war in
Mexico? I don't know. No, I don't know. My father
never told us that. No? Never? No, he never told us
why. Well, it's just that the war was done, as it's
done here, by any Chucutani. That's how the war was
done in Mexico. I don't know with whom they fought
in Mexico. I don't know much about that. It's just
that that year was when they came here. They came
here to Matamoros, and from there they went here.
Yes. Since then, we've never... I didn't know
about Mexico until they died. My father and my
mother died. Because they didn't know that my aunt
was in Matamoros, on the other side of Brandeis.
And I was a little sad because my mother and my
father died. And because I didn't know so much,
they said that they were going to take me there. And
my aunt came and we lived there. Well, this war was
called the Revolution. The Mexican Revolution.
Was it a good thing for Mexico or not? I don't know.
No? I don't know.
Your mom or dad never said... No, they... Well,
they talked to other gentlemen. Yes. But we didn't
pay much attention because they... Well, I don't
know. My father and my mother had those customs.
When they came to talk, they were the only ones
there. We were the ones in charge of the kitchen.
And they talked to the men and women in the kitchen.
When my mother came to talk to the women, to visit
them, They were talking to each other and we were in
the kitchen cooking and it was almost noon. When
the food was ready, we would talk to my mother and my
aunt. When the girls came to visit us, they would go
to the kitchen with my aunt and my mother and we
would talk to the girls.
And they would prepare the food for us. When it was
ready, they would bring their girls to eat and we
would eat. They were the neighbors. Before they
weren't. And now the boys know everything because
they hear everything and they listen to
everything first than the older ones. We weren't.
We were the most different people before. They
weren't like they were. The parents were very
reserved. They talked to the people who came to
visit them. The ladies too. And now the boys
realize everything, the conversations of the
parents or other people. And we didn't. My parents
were raised differently and we were raised like
them. Other models, not like now. But the models
are very different. Well, your mother had sadness
for Mexico. Yes, she said it was her homeland and
everything, but here it is, here are my children,
here is my family. My mother died, my brothers.
What am I going to do in Mexico? Her mother's
siblings were in Mexico. Yes, but they died. Her
mother and her two siblings died. Only her little
sister lives in Mexico. She lives in Padilla,
Tamaulipas. That's my mother's little sister.
Her name is Edelmira Balboa.
The governor of Tamaulipas Prageres Balboa. I
didn't hear him say it. I didn't hear him say it.
Prageres Balboa, who was the governor of Texas,
who is...
What's his name? Do you know what the governor of
Texas is called? Well, I understand. Yeah, but I
forgot his name. Well, just like the governor of
Texas, in the United States. Yes. That man,
Rajerez Balboa, is my aunt's brother, my mother's
little sister. Your aunt's brother and governor?
Yes, he was governor from Tamaulipas to
Matamoros, because it's Tamaulipas to
Matamoros,
right? Yes. Texas, the capital of Texas is Austin,
Texas. And the capital of Tamaulipas is Ciudad
Victoria, up to Matamoros. Well, he was governor
from Ciudad Victoria to Matamoros, my uncle. He's
my aunt's little brother. In what year was he
governor? Last year he was. Now I don't know who was
the governor of the state of Tamaulipas. He was the
governor of Tamaulipas. He was the governor of
Tamaulipas. And he is the brother of his aunt? My
uncle's brother. Your uncle's brother. Is he your
uncle? Yes, he's my uncle because my mother... My
mother's sister is... She's my mother's mother's
daughter, but she didn't... My mother had another
relative, because her father was another, and
then my grandmother became a widow and married
that man. And my aunt was born. Yes. And he had a lot
of education. My aunt? Yes. My aunt from Elmira?
Yes. Oh, yes. She had school in Mexico. Yes. She had
school in Mexico. In Mexico, I have a nephew. He's a
nephew because his mother is my first sister. He's
the daughter of a sister of my father, sister of my
father. And the boy? He is the son of my cousin, and
he is a public servant. He is a very unintelligent
man, the boy. And he took me out about a month ago. He
took out my baptismal certificate. Yes. Because I
didn't have it, and I needed that paper. Why didn't
I have faith in baptism? Because I was baptized
when I was very little and my father came to Mexico,
to the United States, and they never gave me faith
in baptism. Because at that time they didn't give
faith in baptism, only that all the records
remained in the church where the children were
baptized. Because there were no fathers like
here, standing up. They came from other big towns
to do baptism, to baptize children. Every two
years my mother and every third year they came to
baptize. And when I was born, it was the time when I
was coming from the father to baptize. And it was
when they baptized me. But there were papers in
Padil, in Padil's church.
Well, I think this machine is better, because the
other machine had a problem.
His uncle, his name was Balboa, Mr. Balboa, who was
governor. Yes, like two years ago, I don't know.
And his family? I don't know his family. When we
went, my uncle said that my uncle, when he was
announced and came to Nuevo Laredo, When the
governor of Texas came. Ah, yes. I heard him say
that the governor of Tamaulipas was going to come.
And he was from a rich family, or poor, or
middle-aged? I don't know. No, his father was
the administrator of the hacienda. Ah, from
Hacienda de Dolores. His father was an
administrator. He was the administrator of the
farm. Yes, yes. Well, in Mexico, as humble as a
family is, what makes it to be introduced among
other people who know about it. Because of their
language, right? Yes. Because of their
education. Yes. That boy is very humble. Yes. His
father was a worker at a ranch. He was a cowherd, as
they say here in Caboes. Yes. His father. His
father. The boy's father. But his father died as a
result of that. They were raising a lot of cattle. A
lot of cattle. And they came over him and a very
brave bull came over him. He went over him, over the
horse and he hit him. He was very bad. His father
died. They stayed there for half a year. His mother
had them in school and he graduated from school.
And my aunt said, He was a very polite boy. He was
very simple, but he had a very good education. Ah,
yes. And this is the most important thing in
Mexico. Education. Education. Is it the same
here? What? Education. Education. Is it the most
important thing here? I think so. The
opportunity. For work. Yes. And in Mexico too. He
is a boy who has a lot of intelligence, he has a very
good memory. He will soon finish his school. I have
a nephew here. He is the youngest of my brothers. He
graduated from school in May. He has very good, how
do you say? Él tiene muy buenos grados y muy
inteligente en la escuela. Sí. Y él tiene plan de,
ya tiene todo arreglado porque él quiere ir al
colegio. Sí. Quiere ir al colegio. Y nada menos
ayer le habló el sargento porque lo que dice que
tiene muy buenos requisitos. Sí. De los marines.
Quieren llevárselo. Sí. Porque dice que tiene un
muchachito muy guay. who has a lot of intelligence
in studying and everything. And he said he had a
plan. He asked other people, what plans do you
have? I have a plan to go to college. Yes. Well, he
says, we'll give you college. We'll give you
training and we'll give you everything. Yes. But
who knows what he's going to do. He wants to go to
college. Yes. He's curious. And he just turned 18.
He graduated from school and now he has plans to
spend the rest of his life on alcohol.